Bank Loan Approval Prediction

This project is about predicting whether a bank should approve a loan application or not.
I built it using Logistic Regression, focusing on a clean workflow, clear logic, and practical evaluation rather than just model accuracy.

The idea is simple: given a customer’s basic financial and employment details, the model predicts Approved (1) or Not Approved (0).

Why I built this:

Loan approval is a real-world problem where decisions matter.
I wanted to practice:

Turning raw data into usable features

Building a full ML pipeline from scratch

Explaining model results in a way that makes business sense

This project helped me understand how classification models behave beyond just numbers.

What data is used

The dataset contains 500 customer records with these features:

Age

Income

Credit Score

Employment Status (Salaried, Self-employed, Unemployed)

The target column is:

Approved → 1 for approved, 0 for rejected

The data is clean and has no missing values.

How the project works

Here’s the flow I followed:

Loaded and explored the dataset to understand distributions

Encoded employment status into numeric form

Selected relevant features

Split data into training and testing sets

Scaled features using StandardScaler

Trained a Logistic Regression model

Evaluated results using multiple metrics

Plotted ROC curve and calculated AUC

Created a reusable prediction function

Everything is kept simple and readable.

Model performance (honest results)

Accuracy: 62%

Precision: 62%

Recall: 65%

F1 Score: 63%

AUC Score: 0.71

This isn’t a “perfect” model and that’s okay.
The AUC score shows the model can reasonably separate approved and rejected loans, which is more important than chasing high accuracy on a small dataset.

Example prediction
predict_loan(35, 190000, 800, "Salaried")


Output:

Loan Approved
Probability: 0.88

predict_loan(55, 30000, 500, "Unemployed")


Output:

Loan Not Approved
Probability: 0.12

Tools and libraries

Python

Pandas & NumPy

Matplotlib & Seaborn

Scikit-learn

What I learned from this project

How feature scaling impacts Logistic Regression

Why precision and recall matter in business decisions

How to interpret confusion matrices properly

How to explain ML results in plain language

About me

I’m a data analytics fresher building hands-on projects to strengthen my fundamentals in Python, statistics, and machine learning.
This project is part of that learning journey.
